Add autotools example using AutotoolsToolchain with libfmt (#3127)
conan-io/docs: examples/tools/autotools/autotools_toolchain/build_project_autotools_toolchain.rst

.. _examples_tools_autotools_autotools_toolchain_build_project_autotools_toolchain:

Build a simple Autotools project using Conan
============================================

In this example, we are going to create a string formatter application
that uses one of the most popular C++ libraries: `fmt <https://fmt.dev/latest/index.html/>`_.

We'll use `Autotools <https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Autotools-Introduction.html>`_ as build system and `pkg-config <https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/>`_ as a helper tool in this case, so you should get them installed

> on Linux and Mac before going forward with this example.

Author: > Are they installed by default in Mac OSX?

No, but they can easily be installed with `brew`, a package manager very popular on OSX.

> Actually those links might not be the best for instructions how to install

Those links are not related how to install, but about the project, in case users want more information.

> Or will be apt install xxxx the best for many users?

I could add section with installation steps on Linux and OSX, but both are not official, as both `brew` and `apt` are not official package managers maintained by Linux or OSX. 

We could explain, "for this example we will use Linux Ubuntu and apt as package manager"

For Mac the same thing, could add `brew` steps.

There are more tools, like `automake` which is not installed by default for both.

source code for the string formatter program in *main.cpp*.

Let's have a look at the *main.cpp* file, it only prints a simple message but uses ``fmt::print`` method for it.

.. code-block:: cpp
    :caption: **main.cpp**

    #include <cstdlib>
    #include <fmt/core.h>

    int main() {
        fmt::print("{} - The C++ Package Manager!\n", "Conan");
        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

The ``configure.ac`` file checks for a C++ compiler using the ``AC_PROG_CXX`` macro and also checks for the ``fmt.pc`` pkg-config module using the ``PKG_CHECK_MODULES`` macro.

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: **configure.ac**

    AC_INIT([stringformatter], [0.1.0])
    AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([1.10 -Wall no-define foreign])
    AC_CONFIG_SRCDIR([src/main.cpp])
    AC_CONFIG_FILES([Makefile])
    PKG_CHECK_MODULES([fmt], [fmt])
    AC_PROG_CXX
    AC_OUTPUT

The *Makefile.am* specifies that ``string_formatter`` is the expected executable and that it should be linked to the ``fmt`` library.

.. code-block:: text

>     :caption: **Mafile.am**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :caption: **Makefile.am**
```

.. _examples_tools_autotools_autotools_toolchain_build_project_autotools_toolchain:

Build a simple Autotools project using Conan
============================================

In this example, we are going to create a string formatter application
that uses one of the most popular C++ libraries: `fmt <https://fmt.dev/latest/index.html/>`__.

> We'll use Autotools as build system and pkg-config as helper tool in this case, so you should get them installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll use `Autotools <https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Autotools-Introduction.html>`_ as build system and `pkg-config <https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/>`_ as helper tool in this case, so you should get them installed
```
a reader might not be familiar what are these things, providing some links would be helpful

on Linux and Mac before going forward with this example.

Please, at first, clone the sources to recreate this project, you can find them in the
`examples2.0 repository <https://github.com/conan-io/examples2>`_ in GitHub:

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone https://github.com/conan-io/examples2.git

>     cd examples2/examples/tools/autotools/autotoolstoolchain/string_formatter

Reviewer 2: I get no such file or directory

Author: It requires https://github.com/conan-io/examples2/pull/84 first

> We start from a very simple C++ language project with this structure:

Author: fixed

.. code-block:: text

    .
    ├── configure.ac
    ├── Makefile.am
    ├── conanfile.txt
    └── src
        └── main.cpp

This project contains a basic *configure.ac* including the **fmt** pkg-config dependency and the
source code for the string formatter program in *main.cpp*.

Let's have a look at the *main.cpp* file, it only prints a default message, but uses ``fmt::print`` method for it.

.. code-block:: cpp
    :caption: **main.c**

    #include <cstdlib>
    #include <fmt/core.h>

>     int main(int argc, char** argv) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    int main() {
```
not used there, may trigger a warning (unused argument)

> Let's have a look at the *main.cpp* file, it only prints a default message, but uses ``fmt::print`` method for it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's have a look at the *main.cpp* file, it only prints a simple message, but uses ``fmt::print`` method for it.
```
I don't thing `default` is right word here

Author: fixed, thanks!

>     :caption: **main.c**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    :caption: **main.cpp**
```
it won't compile as pure c

Author: good catch, fixed, thanks

        fmt::print("{} - The C++ Package Manager!\n", "Conan");
        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

The ``configure.ac`` tells us about our project will a C++ compiler and a pkg-config module named as ``fmt.pc``

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: **configure.ac**

    AC_INIT([stringformatter], [0.1.0])
    AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([1.10 -Wall no-define foreign])
    AC_CONFIG_SRCDIR([src/main.cpp])
    AC_CONFIG_FILES([Makefile])
    PKG_CHECK_MODULES([fmt], [fmt])
    AC_PROG_CXX
    AC_OUTPUT

> And, the *Makefile.am* has ``string_formatter`` as our expected executable, and it will linked to the ``fmt`` library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And, the *Makefile.am* has ``string_formatter`` as our expected executable, and it will be linked to the ``fmt`` library.
```
passive voice?

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: **Mafile.am**

    AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS = subdir-objects
    ACLOCAL_AMFLAGS = ${ACLOCAL_FLAGS}

    bin_PROGRAMS = string_formatter
    string_formatter_SOURCES = src/main.cpp
    string_formatter_CPPFLAGS = $(fmt_CFLAGS)
    string_formatter_LDADD = $(fmt_LIBS)

The *conanfile.txt* looks simple, just install **fmt** and uses two generatos to build our project

.. code-block:: ini
    :caption: **conanfile.txt**

    [requires]
    fmt/9.1.0

    [generators]
    AutotoolsToolchain
    PkgConfigDeps

In this case, we will use :ref:`PkgConfigDeps<conan_tools_gnu_pkgconfigdeps>` to generate information about where the **fmt** library
files are installed thanks to the `*.pc` files and :ref:`AutotoolsToolchain<conan_tools_gnu_autotoolstoolchain>` to pass build information

> to *autotools* using a `conanbuild[.sh|.bat]` file that describes the compilation environment.

Reviewer 2: need some link to reference, what is this `conanbuild` file

Author: there is no main reference about it, but you can find more points of explanation by using the search bar.

> We will use Conan to install **fmt** and generate the files that Autotools needs to find this library and build our project.

Reviewer 2: what are the files to be generated?

Author: improved the line, please, review it again.

Building on Linux and macOS
---------------------------

> First, we should install the requirements. For this example we didn't consider your profile, but ``fmt`` is higly compatible with many different configurations.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure who are `we` in this context. maybe use unspecified sentence like  `your profile wasn't considered`

Author: Your interior voice 😂 But seriously, there is no problem by using `we`, even the [tutorial](https://docs.conan.io/2/tutorial/consuming_packages/build_simple_cmake_project.html) is using it. The idea is writer be your guide during the steps, like, we are doing it together.

.. code-block:: shell

    conan install . --build=missing

Now we are ready to build and run our **string_formatter** app:

.. code-block:: shell

    source conanbuild.sh

The ``conanbuild.sh`` generated by the :ref:`VirtualBuildEnv<conan_tools_env_virtualbuildenv>` will fill all environment

> variables according to your profile, plus, Autotools, fmt .pc files and ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH`` as environment variable.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be nice to rephrase this and explain a bit more of what each AutotoolsToolchain and PkgConfigDeps generators did after the install.

Author: done, added some reference about AutotoolsToolchain and PkgConfigDeps

.. code-block:: shell

    aclocal
    automake --add-missing
    autoconf
    ./configure
    make

> Now we generate the ``configure`` and ``Makefile``, then we build our project by running the ``make`` command.

Reviewer 2: it would be better to explain each step a little bit more here

Author: added more details about each step.

> As final result, we will have the binary ``string_formatter`` installed in our example folder.

Reviewer 2: don't we already have it by that time?

Author: Yes, I improved that line, please, review it again.

.. code-block:: shell

    ./string_formatter
    Conan - The C++ Package Manager!

Building on Windows
-------------------

To build on Windows, we will use a pre-defined profile as an example to give a better view of our current configuration.
Also, we will be running on the default command prompt, it can be invoked by ``cmd.exe``.

.. code-block:: ini
    :caption: **profiles/msys2**

    [settings]
    arch=x86_64
    build_type=Release
    compiler=gcc
    compiler.exception=seh
    compiler.libcxx=libstdc++
    compiler.threads=posix
    compiler.version=11
    os=Windows
    [options]
    */*:shared=True
    [conf]
    tools.cmake.cmaketoolchain:generator=MSYS Makefiles
    tools.microsoft.bash:subsystem=msys2
    tools.microsoft.bash:active=True
    [tool_requires]
    msys2/cci.latest
    autoconf/2.71
    automake/1.16.5
    pkgconf/1.9.3
    [buildenv]
    CC=gcc
    CXX=g++

> With this profile, we will build on Windows, with MSYS2 support and GCC 11. Some build requirements will be needed too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this profile, we will build on Windows, with MSYS2 support and GCC 11. Some tool requirements will be needed too.
```

> As the first step, we will install MSYS2 Conan package, to be able to run bash inside of our command prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the first step, we will install `MSYS2 <https://www.msys2.org/>`_ Conan package, to be able to run bash inside of our command prompt.
```

Author: removed Windows section for simplification.

.. code-block:: batch

    conan install -r conancenter --requires=msys2/cci.latest -g VirtualBuildEnv
    conanbuild.bat

>     set MSYSTEM=MSYS

Reviewer 2: why not put it into profile?

Author: Removed Windows section for simplification.

    set MSYS2_PATH_TYPE=inherit
    set CHERE_INVOKING=1
    %MSYS_BIN%\bash.exe -l

Once we have installed ``msys2/cci.latest`` package, we can activate the environment generated by :ref:`VirtualBuildEnv<conan_tools_env_virtualbuildenv>`.

> Then, we need to configure some environment variables required by MSYS2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, we need to `configure <https://www.msys2.org/wiki/Launchers/>`_ some `environment variables <https://www.msys2.org/wiki/MSYS2-introduction/>`_ required by MSYS2.
```
it's a bit unclear what are these variables we're setting here

Author: Removed Windows section for simplification.

The environment variable ``%MSYS_BIN%`` is configured by the script ``conanbuild.bat`` so we do not need to find where the Conan package is installed.

> As next step, we start the bash terminal embedded in the Conan package.

Reviewer 2: a terminal is not embedded, I don't think this sentence is technically correct, and it's rather confusing. terminal emulator is embedded (which is mintty), bash is not a terminal, it's sell, and terminal (tty) will be created once bash is launched.

Author: right, but we will postpone windows section for now, too much for this PR.

> This extras steps are only needed because we are building our project manually on the terminal,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These extra steps are only needed because we are building our project manually on the terminal,
```

Author: removed Windows section for simplification.

> but in case it would be a regular Conan recipe, building a Conan package, it would not be necessary.

Reviewer 2: what is `it` here? (both cases)

Author: Removed Windows section for simplification.

Now we are ready to build the example.

> Now we should install and build the ``fmt`` with the msys custom profiles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we should install and build the ``fmt`` with the MSYS custom profiles.
```

Author: removed Windows section for simplification.

Note that we do not need to use activated bash configuration for this action, otherwise, it may raise an unix path error when building the library.

.. code-block:: shell

>     conan install -r conancenter . --build=missing --profile:host=profiles/msys -c tools.microsoft.bash:active=False

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing to me, this shouldn't be the case.
If there is a gap in ``fmt`` recipe for ``msys2``, then probably better address it first.

Author: Removed Windows section for simplification.

> Note that we do not need to use activated bash configuration for this action, otherwise, it may raise an unix path error when building the library.

Reviewer 2: what is `bash configuration` in this context?

Author: removed Windows section for simplification.

> And now we can generate shell scripts that should be loaded by our terminal and will configure our settings, options, and environment variables like ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH``.

Reviewer 2: they will be loaded by shell, not a terminal

.. _examples_tools_autotools_autotools_toolchain_build_project_autotools_toolchain:

Build a simple Autotools project using Conan
============================================

In this example, we are going to create a string formatter application
that uses one of the most popular C++ libraries: `fmt <https://fmt.dev/latest/index.html/>`__.

We'll use Autotools as build system and pkg-config as helper tool in this case, so you should get them installed
on Linux and Mac before going forward with this example. In case you do not have them installed already, you can

> `Conan Center <https://conan.io/center/>`_ and install them as build requirements.

Reviewer 3: I would remove the sentence about installing them as build requirements, because if this tutorial is example is for newbies it may be a bit confusing, the most typical thing is to have that installed on the system.

Author: Done.

Please, at first, clone the sources to recreate this project, you can find them in the
`examples2.0 repository <https://github.com/conan-io/examples2>`_ in GitHub:

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone https://github.com/conan-io/examples2.git
    cd examples2/examples/tools/autotools/autotoolstoolchain/string_formatter

We start from a very simple C++ language project with this structure:

.. code-block:: text

    .
    ├── configure.ac
    ├── Makefile.am
    ├── conanfile.txt
    └── src
        └── main.cpp

This project contains a basic *configure.ac* including the **fmt** pkg-config dependency and the
source code for the string formatter program in *main.cpp*.

Let's have a look at the *main.cpp* file, it only prints a default message, but uses ``fmt::print`` method for it.

.. code-block:: cpp
    :caption: **main.c**

    #include <cstdlib>
    #include <fmt/core.h>

    int main(int argc, char** argv) {
        fmt::print("{} - The C++ Package Manager!\n", "Conan");
        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

> The ``configure.ac`` tells us about our project will a C++ compiler and a pkg-config module named as ``fmt.pc``

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit confusing, can we rephrase this? Something like this?

The ``configure.ac`` file checks for a C++ compiler using the ``AC_PROG_CXX`` macro and also checks for the `fmt.pc` pkg-config module using the PKG_CHECK_MODULES macro.

Reviewer 2: yes, please change. it doesn't `tell`, as it's not living entity, I think it's confusing for non-native speakers to use metaphors.

Author: Changed.

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: **configure.ac**

    AC_INIT([stringformatter], [0.1.0])
    AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE([1.10 -Wall no-define foreign])
    AC_CONFIG_SRCDIR([src/main.cpp])
    AC_CONFIG_FILES([Makefile])
    PKG_CHECK_MODULES([fmt], [fmt])
    AC_PROG_CXX
    AC_OUTPUT

> And, the *Makefile.am* has ``string_formatter`` as our expected executable, and it will linked to the ``fmt`` library.
> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe rephrase this?

```suggestion
The *Makefile.am* specifies that ``stringformatter`` is the expected executable and that it should be linked to the ``fmt`` library.

```

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: **Mafile.am**

    AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS = subdir-objects
    ACLOCAL_AMFLAGS = ${ACLOCAL_FLAGS}

    bin_PROGRAMS = string_formatter
    string_formatter_SOURCES = src/main.cpp
    string_formatter_CPPFLAGS = $(fmt_CFLAGS)
    string_formatter_LDADD = $(fmt_LIBS)

> The *conanfile.txt* looks simple, just install **fmt** and uses two generatos to build our project

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The *conanfile.txt* looks simple as it just installs the **fmt** package and uses two generators to build our project.```

.. code-block:: ini
    :caption: **conanfile.txt**

    [requires]
    fmt/9.1.0

    [generators]
    AutotoolsToolchain
    PkgConfigDeps

In this case, we will use :ref:`PkgConfigDeps<conan_tools_gnu_pkgconfigdeps>` to generate information about where the **fmt** library
files are installed thanks to the `*.pc` files and :ref:`AutotoolsToolchain<conan_tools_gnu_autotoolstoolchain>` to pass build information
to *autotools* using a `conanbuild[.sh|.bat]` file that describes the compilation environment.

We will use Conan to install **fmt** and generate the files that Autotools needs to find this library and build our project.

Building on Linux and macOS
---------------------------

First, we should install the requirements. For this example we didn't consider your profile, but ``fmt`` is higly compatible with many different configurations.

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add more context to the sentence: "For this example we didn't consider your profile"

Author: reformulated, please, review it again.
